THE DHARMA OF CULTIVATION TRANSMITTED BY H.H. DORJE CHANG BUDDHA III
An oral discourse on the dharma given by
His Holiness Dorje Chang Buddha III Wan Ko Yeshe Norbu Holiest Tathagata
to rinpoches and other disciples:

WHAT IS CULTIVATION ?

Today you, who are a rinpoche, respectfully requested a
discourse on the dharma relating to the question
“What is cultivation?” This is a very fundamental lesson;
indeed, the first lesson. Nonetheless, this is an important
matter that many cultivators, including those who have
practiced cultivation over many years, do not understand
and are confused about. It is difficult to incarnate as a
human being. It is even more difficult to incarnate as a
human being with the opportunity to encounter the true
Buddha-dharma. Thus, today I will enlighten everyone on
dharma relating to the question “What is cultivation?”
The essence of learning Buddhism lies with carrying
out what we learn in our cultivation. We use good and bad
causes and conditions as objects of cognition. Therefore,
we must first understand what cultivation is. Cultivation is
cultivating the increase of good karma and cultivating the
avoidance of bad karma. It is increasing good karmic
conditions, planting good causes, and reaping good effects.
It is avoiding the increase of bad karmic conditions, not
planting bad causes, and avoiding the reaping of bad
effects. But the term cultivation has a rather broad
meaning. We must first understand what cultivation is.
There must be that upon which the cultivator can rely.
Without that which can be relied upon, your cultivation
can easily become erroneous, non-Buddhist cultivation.
For example, the cultivation of demonism entails
cultivating the behavior of demons. The cultivation of
Buddhism entails cultivating the behavior of Buddhas.
Therefore, there must be that upon which the cultivator


can rely. There must be models that the cultivator can
reflect and rely upon.
All other religions espouse eliminating evil, promoting
good, restraining selfishness, and benefiting others. The
cultivator cannot rely upon this alone, for this is
cultivation without understanding the purpose of
Buddhism. This alone is not the practice of true
Buddhism. Thus, in our cultivation, that which we rely
upon is the Buddha. The perfect enlightenment of the
Buddha is the model for our cultivation. We use our three
karmas of bodily actions, speech, and thoughts to emulate
everything about the Buddha. We thereby keep ourselves
far away from all impure karma based on delusion and all
evil conduct. We thereby constantly stay far away from
that which is evil or bad. By not being involved with that
which is evil or bad, our three karmas do not increase bad
causes. Rather, we must carry out all good karma. Even
one kind thought is something we should increase and
never decrease. We should increase our good karmic
affinity, good causes, and good karma every day. Simply
put, we must always avoid that which is evil or bad and
accumulate that which is good.
Why can it be said that we must stay far away from
evil or bad karma but it cannot be said that we must
eliminate evil or bad karma? Within the truth of
Buddhism, there is the doctrine that the law of cause and
effect can never be denied. Cause and effect cannot be
eliminated. To say that it can is to take a nihilistic point of
view. Hence, we can only build a wall of good karma,

which is like building a retaining wall. This wall of good
karma has the effect of blocking us from our evil karma.
Thus, only through learning from the Buddha,
cultivating the conduct of the Buddha, and ultimately
becoming a Buddha can we thoroughly liberate ourselves
from the karma (cause and effect) that binds us to the cycle
of reincarnation. Cause and effect still exists when one
becomes a Buddha. However, cause and effect can not
affect a Buddha. For example, the Buddha saw mountains
of swords and seas of fire in the hell realm. The mountains
of swords and seas of fire continued to exist as extremely
painful means by which living beings undergo karmic
retribution. When the Buddha suddenly jumped into the
mountains of swords and seas of fire in order to undergo
suffering on behalf of other living beings, the mountains
and seas immediately transformed into a lotus pond of
nectar. They transformed into a wonderful state. With
respect to a Buddha, all bad or evil karmic conditions turn
into the manifestation of good karma. Not only is there no
suffering, there is instead a manifestation of great
happiness.
Cultivation is to leave the cycle of reincarnation,
liberate yourself from all suffering, become a holy being,
and persevere until you become a Buddha. To leave the
cycle of reincarnation, we must establish a mind of
renunciation (a mind determined to leave the cycle of
reincarnation), a mind of firm belief, a mind with
immovable vows, a mind of diligence, and mahayana
bodhicitta. All real states emanating from these minds rely
upon and are based upon right view. Without right view,
all states of mind will be inverted and confused. In other
words, you will not experience any beneficial effects from
cultivation that lacks right view.
For example, if you want to practice bodhicitta first,
you will not be successful. It will result in an empty and
illusory bodhicitta, a deluded and false state of mind. That

is because bodhicitta must be based upon a mind of
renunciation. That is, you must have a mind that is truly
determined to attain liberation, to attain accomplishment
in the dharma, and leave all of the sufferings of
reincarnation. You must deeply understand that the cycle
of reincarnation is indescribably painful. Not only are you
yourself suffering, but all living beings in the six realms of
reincarnation, each of whom we regard as our father or
mother, are likewise suffering in the painful state of
impermanence. Only if you want to extricate yourself from
suffering do you truly cultivate yourself. Only then do you
engage in Bodhisattva conduct that benefits yourself and
others. Only then can bodhicitta arise.
However, it would be a mistake if you begin by
cultivating a mind of renunciation. That would not accord
with the proper order of cultivation. That would result in a
non-substantive, theoretical type of desire to leave
reincarnation and a self-deluded and self-confused state of
mind. In such case, you would not be able to establish the
true state of mind that is determined to leave the cycle of
reincarnation.
Thus, if you want to have this true state of mind that
is determined to leave the cycle of reincarnation, you must
first understand impermanence. The second step is to have
a mind of firm belief. You must firmly believe in the
sufferings of reincarnation, which has as its source
impermanence. Only with such a mind of firm belief will
you fear the sufferings caused by impermanence and
successfully attain a state of mind that truly fears
impermanence. Having attained a state of mind that truly
fears impermanence, your state of mind that is determined
to leave the cycle of reincarnation will grow stronger day
by day. Naturally, your state of mind that is determined to
leave the cycle of reincarnation will enter a real state that
truly fears impermanence. If living beings do not
understand that all conditional dharmas in the universe are


impermanent, if they do not understand the sufferings
connected with reincarnation and impermanence, then
they cannot establish a firm mind that gives rise to
thoughts of leaving the cycle of reincarnation. If you have
never thought about leaving the cycle of reincarnation, you
will not cultivate at all, and you will not want to learn
Buddhism. Those who do not learn Buddhism have no
desire to leave the cycle of reincarnation. How could one
who does not learn Buddhism have a mind determined to
leave the cycle of reincarnation? Thus, you cannot first
cultivate a mind determined to leave the cycle of
reincarnation. As for the first step, you will not enter
Buddhism without having a mind of impermanence.
(Truly giving rise to feelings of fear of impermanence and
truly giving rise to a state that fears impermanence.) Even
if you become Buddhist, you will not be able to attain a
deep level of correct cultivation.
To understand what cultivation is, you must
understand the eight fundamental right views relating to
learning Buddhism and cultivation.
The first one is a mind of impermanence. The second
is a mind with firm belief. The third is a mind of
renunciation (a mind determined to leave the cycle of
reincarnation). The fourth is a mind with true vows. The
fifth is a mind of diligence. The sixth is the precepts. The
seventh is dhyana and samadhi. The eighth is bodhicitta.
Recognizing these eight dharmas and carrying them out
with right views is correct practice of Buddha-dharma.
These eight fundamental right views, which are
indispensable for cultivators, must not be taken out of
order. All the fruits resulting from a mind of
impermanence are causes of cultivation. All of the fruits
resulting from a mind with firm belief are causes of
steadfastness that does not change. All of the fruits
resulting from a mind of renunciation are causes of
liberation. All of the fruits resulting from a mind with true


vows are causes of action. All of the fruits resulting from a
mind of diligence are causes of persistent advancement. All
of the fruits resulting from the precepts are causes of
correct direction of cultivation. All of the fruits resulting
from dhyana and samadhi are causes of wisdom. All of the
fruits resulting from bodhicitta are causes leading to
becoming a Bodhisattva.
These eight fundamental right views are the foundation
of cultivation, liberation, and accomplishment in the
dharma. If the root is not right, cultivation will not be
established. Therefore, cultivation cannot be disorderly.
Thus, practicing the eight fundamentals of cultivation must
be guided by right views. That is, guided by right
understanding and right view, you correctly develop your
cultivation by going through these eight fundamentals in
their proper order. That is cultivation. In your cultivation,
you must constantly put into practice bodhicitta. That is
because bodhicitta is the foundation for becoming a
Bodhisattva.
According to the Buddha’s exposition of the dharma,
the true meaning of bodhicitta is that it is the cause that
will inevitably lead to becoming a Bodhisattva. Whoever
walks the path of bodhi will ultimately reap the fruit of
bodhi. The broad meaning of bodhicitta includes all of the
mahayana dharma having to do with saving living beings
out of great compassion and the causes leading to attaining
the stages of enlightenment of a Bodhisattva.
However, because of the insufficient good fortune of
living beings, some of the originally complete meaning of
the Buddha-dharma has been lost as it was handed down
from generation to generation. Especially in this current
Dharma-Ending Age in which the karma of living beings
in the three spheres (worlds) of the universe is like a sea of
surging waves, it is as difficult for living beings to
encounter the true Buddha-dharma as it is for a blind
turtle swimming in the ocean to stick its neck through a



tiny knothole in a floating and bobbing board. Thus, it is
now extremely difficult to obtain the perfect Buddhadharma. As a result, the meaning of bodhi has shrunk. It
has gradually shrunk from its broad meaning to the
narrow meaning of bodhicitta dharma.
There are two types of bodhicitta. There is bodhicitta
in the holy sense and bodhicitta in the worldly sense.
Bodhicitta in the worldly sense can be roughly divided
into “vow bodhicitta” and “action bodhicitta.” The
practice of vow and action bodhicitta includes a myriad of
dharma methods, such as those relating to sentient beings,
non-sentient things, the four great elements, one’s own six
elements, as well as breathing, the ear base, the eye base
and other bases, inner and outer mandalas, and ritualistic
chanting. Whether it is bodhicitta in the worldly sense or
the holy sense, if you are guided by the two sets of seven
branches of bodhicitta, that is the highest, most excellent,
and most complete form of bodhicitta.
Each living being in the six realms of reincarnation
within the three spheres of existence has the right to
cultivate bodhicitta. However, most living beings do not
have the karmic affinity. Thus, they practice a fragmented
and shrunken version of bodhicitta dharma. As a result,
they frequently harbor the misconceptions that only those
with an enlightened mind can practice bodhicitta or
bodhicitta is the dharmakaya state of enlightenment. Of
course, we do not deny these are existing parts of
bodhicitta. However, these conceptions omit the practice of
bodhicitta dharma by those living beings who do not have
an enlightened mind. More importantly, bodhicitta is not
dependant upon an enlightened mind or an unenlightened
mind. Bodhicitta is the power of vows made out of great
compassion by those living beings who learn Buddhism in
any of the six realms of reincarnation within the three
spheres of the universe as well as the power of vows made
out of great compassion by all holy beings in the dharma

realm. Bodhicitta is actual conduct based upon great
compassion that aids living beings in becoming Buddhas or
Bodhisattvas. It is the mind of love in the holy sense that
the enlightened and the unenlightened or the holy and the
ordinary both have.
With respect to bodhicitta, those who are enlightened
use their enlightened state of virtue and realization, correct
practices, and propagation of the true dharma to teach and
enlighten living beings so that those living beings will
become Buddhas. With respect to bodhicitta, those who
are not yet enlightened vow out of great compassion that
living beings and themselves shall together attain
accomplishment in the dharma and liberation. They help
other people enter the path of the true dharma of the
Buddha, vowing that they will become Bodhisattvas and
Buddhas. To such persons, bodhicitta dharma is the virtue
of aiding others to become accomplished in the dharma.
Because they benefit others, they receive merit. They
thereby increase the causes leading to their becoming
Bodhisattvas.
The manifestation of bodhicitta is expressed through
actual practice involving the three karmas, which practice
reflects great compassion. Any true cultivator, no matter
whether he or she is ordinary or holy, has the right to
arouse bodhicitta and should arouse bodhicitta. That is
because bodhicitta is not an enlightened mind possessed
only by holy people. Rather, it is conduct based upon great
compassion. It is the planting of causes based upon a vow
that oneself and others become enlightened. Bodhicitta
does not only include the ten good characteristics, the four
limitless states of mind (the four immeasurables), the six
paramitas (perfections), and the four all-embracing
Bodhisattva virtues (four methods that Bodhisattvas
employ to approach and save living beings). Rather, it
includes the entire Tripitaka, the esoteric scriptures, and all
dharma transmitted orally, through the ears, or




telepathically that engenders conduct that is greatly
compassionate, is in accord with the dharma, and benefits
and saves living beings.
Thus, the bodhicitta is ultimate truth in a broad sense.
With respect to the Buddha, bodhicitta is the three bodies,
the perfect wisdom of Buddha that is summarized in four
truths, and the mind of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. With
respect to a Bodhisattva, bodhicitta is propagating the
dharma and benefiting and saving living beings out of
great compassion. With respect to an enlightened being,
bodhicitta is not being attached to the characteristics or
distinctive features of things and not engaging in
intellectual frivolity or conceptual elaborations. This is his
or her original nature. The true emptiness of original
nature is wonderful existence. It is the ultimate truth of all
conditional dharmas. This truth neither arises nor ceases.
With respect to an ordinary person, bodhicitta is
compassionately helping other people and vowing that
they learn Buddhism and attain liberation.
You must first have the perspective of impermanence
before you can arouse bodhicitta. You must understand the
impermanence and suffering relating to yourself and other
living beings revolving in the cycle of reincarnation and
thereby generate a perspective of awareness, a mind of
impermanence. You will then vow to leave the cycle of
reincarnation. As a result, you will then establish a mind
that is determined to leave the cycle of reincarnation. You
will say, “I resolve to leave.” You also want all living beings
in the six realms, who are like your father or mother, to
leave. You understand that the cycle of reincarnation is like
a bitter sea, is difficult to endure, and is extremely painful.
Because of this resolute perspective, you will generate a
strong and pressing fear. You will constantly seek to be
liberated at this very moment. But you understand that
only by having the conduct of a Bodhisattva can you
quickly attain liberation from the cycle of reincarnation.


You thus vow to become a Bodhisattva. You seek to
quickly enlighten yourself and others. Naturally, you then
generate a mind of great compassion. As a result, the seeds
of enlightenment are disseminated. The arousal of
bodhicitta is based upon a mind of great compassion.
Thus the Buddha said, “The water of great compassion
irrigates the seeds of bodhi. As a result, the bodhi trees will
have lush foliage and the fruits will be plentiful.” Hence,
bodhicitta will naturally be established. Bodhicitta is the
cause leading to becoming a mahayana Bodhisattva. You
will attain pure and correct views and understanding of
cultivation. Based upon these right views, you should
deeply enter the emptiness bhuta-tathata (true suchness)
and the practice of the state of emptiness. At this time, you
transform worldy bodhicitta into a state in which you
realize that “the three entities are inherently empty.” That
is you transform everything in existence into bodhicitta in
a holy sense. With bodhicitta, you cultivate the conduct of
bodhi and enter the stage of a Bodhisattva.
Cultivation of bodhicitta requires implementation.
Cultivation of bodhicitta is not a matter of just ritualistic
chanting, making empty vows, or engaging in visualization.
In the cultivation of bodhicitta, the most important aspect
is deeply pondering the following concerning yourself: “My
body is impermanent, is changing every nanosecond, and is
moving toward decline, old age, and death. I compare why
my face has aged over a ten-year period, over a forty-year
period, or over a seventy-year period. The degree of
agedness of my skin has changed. I will soon enter old age,
sickness, and death and continue revolving in the cycle of
reincarnation where I will experience suffering. I also
contemplate that joyfully innocent, newborn, fresh, and
lively look I had when I was a small child. I contemplate
how I no longer have that childlike appearance. My face
and skin have aged. My energy has declined. I often fall ill.
That quality of youth is gone. The power of impermanence



will end my life. My relatives and old friends will all die one
after another. Like a dream, it will soon be all over. My
mind generates great fear. With a resolute mind, I act in
accord with the precepts, practice in accord with the
dharma, and enter bodhicitta by practicing the two sets of
seven branch bodhicitta dharma: the Dharma of Great
Compassion for All Living Beings as My Mother
Bodhicitta and the Dharma of Bodhisattva Correspondence
Bodhicitta.”
When practicing the Great Compassion for My
Mother Bodhicitta, you arouse great compassion and
cultivate the following: understanding who my mother is,
bearing in mind kindness, repaying kindness, lovingkindness, compassion, renouncing greed, and eliminating
attachment. When practicing this cultivation, everyone
should carry out the following for themselves:
Understanding who my mother is: I deeply
understand that all living beings in the six realms of
reincarnation within the three spheres of the universe have
been since beginning-less time my fathers and mothers in
the revolving cycle of reincarnation.
Bearing in mind kindness: I should deeply bear in
mind that all of my parents (i.e. all living beings) that now
exist in the cycle of reincarnation have since beginning-less
time given birth to me, reared me, loved me, and became
tired and ill for me. Their kindness to me is as heavy as a
mountain. I should bear in mind their kindness. I will
then regard the sufferings of my parents (i.e. all living
beings) as my own suffering.
Repaying kindness: I understand that my parents (i.e.
all living beings) have offered me everything. They are
now revolving and wandering in the six realms of
reincarnation experiencing endless suffering. I resolve to
take action to enlighten myself and others, to save and
liberate my parents (i.e. all living beings) in order to repay
their kindness to me.

Loving-kindness: At all times, through the actions of
my three karmas, I am loving and kind toward all living
beings, who have been my parents. I wish them a long life
without illness, good fortune, good luck, and a happy life.
Compassion: Day and night, I constantly beseech all
of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas to empower all of my
parents (i.e. all living beings) so that they may extricate
themselves from all forms of suffering, encounter and
practice the Buddha-dharma, and liberate themselves from
the sufferings of cyclic existence.
Renouncing greed: I hold no attachment in my mind
to anything that I do to benefit any living beings, who
have been my parents. I cultivate non-attachment to all of
my good actions of body, speech, and mind. Thus, my
good actions become natural and spontaneous, as my
original nature is good. I do not do good purposefully. I do
good and then forget about it.
Eliminating attachment: In my practice, as I cultivate
all forms of goodness and benefit my parents (i.e. all living
beings), I should not become attached to any dharma. I
should eliminate all attachment to self. Realizing a state of
emptiness, I am aware and I experience wonderful
happiness that comes from samadhi. While practicing the
dharma, I am not attached to the dharma. I do not
intentionally get rid of deluded thoughts. I do not
intentionally seek the truth. Not coming and not going,
blissful, clear, and without thought, I am as calm as
tranquil water. Everything, including myself, is inherently
empty.
The supporting conditions for putting bodhicitta into
practice must be based upon right view. We contribute to
living beings in their performance of good deeds, but we do
not contribute or help living beings in their performance of
bad deeds. We rectify their behavior so that they perform
good deeds. Thus, we do all good deeds that benefit living
beings. We plant all good causes that lead to benefiting


living beings. In that way, we carry out the seven branches
of the Dharma of Bodhisattva Correspondence Bodhicitta.
We help living beings in their performing good deeds and
help increase their good causes. We help living beings
reduce their accumulation of bad karma and help them stay
far away from bad causes. The seven branches of the
Dharma of Bodhisattva Correspondence Bodhicitta are as
follows. The first branch is “self and others are equal”
bodhicitta. The second branch is “exchange between self
and others” bodhicitta. The third branch is “benefit others
before self” bodhicitta. The fourth branch is “dedicating
merit” bodhicitta. The fifth branch is “fearlessly protect the
dharma” bodhicitta. The sixth branch is “effectively lead
others to correct practice” bodhicitta. The seventh branch is
“renouncing myself to help others build good karma”
bodhicitta. When practicing this cultivation, everyone
should carry out the following themselves:
Self and others are equal bodhicitta: When there is a
conflict of interest between myself and others, I will rid
myself of hatred, antipathy, greed, and arrogant,
disparaging mentality. I must not emphasize benefiting
myself. I should treat myself and others equally.
Exchange between self and others bodhicitta: I want
to bear the sufferings of all living beings. I give to others
all of my happiness and good luck so that they may leave
suffering and obtain happiness.
Benefit others before self bodhicitta: When other
living beings and I are suffering, I want others to extricate
themselves from suffering before I do. When other living
beings and I are happy, I want others to be happier than I
am.
Dedicating merit bodhicitta: I dedicate to all living
beings all of the merit and accomplishments from my
cultivation in the hope that they will leave suffering and
attain liberation.
Fearlessly protect the dharma bodhicitta: When any
536

evil spirits or demons harm the Buddha-dharma, lead living
beings to break the precepts, and harm living beings
resulting in the suffering of living beings, I will maintain
right view, will not fear the evil powers of those demons,
and will step forward to protect the Buddha-dharma and
the wisdom whereby living beings will become liberated.
Effectively lead others to correct practice bodhicitta:
Because living beings are burdened with the power of
karma that has accumulated since beginning-less time,
because they are ignorant and have created all kinds of
negative karma, there will be times when they will not
repent or change their ways despite my constructive
exhortations. In such case, I will use powerful rectifying
dharma methods to lead such people onto the path of true
dharma and beneficial and good conduct.
Renouncing myself to help others build good karma
bodhicitta: When the realization of other people is higher
than mine or their ability to save living beings is better than
mine, I will yield to other people so that living beings will
be benefited more. At such time, without any hesitation, I
yield to them. This furthers the great undertaking of
goodness.
Bodhicitta, as part of cultivation, is the source of
accomplishment in the dharma and is very important. I
will now give an example involving a rinpoche and a
dharma master. This rinpoche cultivated himself for more
than thirty years. He received more than one thousand
esoteric dharma initiations. He mainly practiced the Great
Perfection Dharma (Dzogchen) of the Nyingma sect. He
was able to expound the Buddha-dharma of the Tripitaka
very well. However, he did not have any real dharma
powers. The other person, a dharma master, had been a
monk for more than twenty years. He strictly abided by
the precepts and rules of discipline. He was well versed in
the sutras, the vinaya (precepts and rules of discipline), and
the commentaries. He practiced important and great


dharmas of the Tibetan esoteric school of Buddhism and
was the abbot of a famous temple. Like the rinpoche, he
was famous in expounding the dharma. However, he also
was unable to manifest any actual realization.
I told them that no matter what great dharma of the
esoteric school they may practice, it is all like building a
tower on quicksand. Such a tower could not be built. I
told them that even if they temporarily had some success
in their practice, it would quickly vanish. I had them
practice letting go of their own knowledge or habituated
way of knowing because these are hindrances. I had them
practice “What Is Cultivation?” After they practiced such
dharma for about eight months, I had them add to their
practice the Great Perfection (Dzogchen) and other
dharmas. A miracle then happened. During a test of his
progress, the rinpoche applied the Vajra Fist Powerful
Thunder True Dharma Palm and manifested great powers.
Actual realization was shown. However, the dharma
master did not manifest any powers. He continued to
practice this cultivation dharma. Under my careful
pointing out of his shortcomings, he finally understood
the importance of true cultivation and how true
cultivation requires devoting time and energy on the actual
carrying out of the three karmas. He finally understood
that there is no room whatsoever for any slippage or
compromise in this regard. He continued his practice for
three months. In a test to measure his ability to manifest
realization, his powers were thoroughly exhibited.
Thus, whoever can cultivate in such manner and carry
out his practice according to the dharma will be able to
obtain the true Buddha-dharma. Naturally, he will develop
wisdom. He will not become involved with empty theories
regarding the Five Vidyas. Rather, he will manifest actual
states of accomplishment in the true Five Vidyas. Such a
person will realize “manifestation of wonderful existence
(supernatural power),” attain the fruit of bodhi, and enter

the stage of a Bodhisattva.
The practitioners of all Buddhist sects should comply
with these rules of cultivation and should practice
bodhicitta. If you do not follow such dharma of cultivation
in its proper order, then you will easily become confused
and lose your way. Such dharma is the key to the methods
of practicing cultivation.
Learning the methods of practicing dharma is another
matter. All beneficial effects derived from learning the
dharma are based upon cultivation. When your practice is
in strict conformity with the dharma, you will naturally
realize virtue and will successfully reach the true state. If
you do not have the correct rules concerning cultivation,
the dharma that you learn will become dharma based on
erroneous view or even the evil dharma of demons. If you
are complying with the dharma of cultivation as stated in
this discourse, the dharma that you have learned is good
dharma, and you are engaged in practicing Buddhadharma. Cultivation also involves the ten good
characteristics, the four limitless states of mind (the four
immeasurables), the six paramitas (perfections), the four
all-embracing Bodhisattva virtues (the four methods that
Bodhisattvas employ to approach and save living beings),
etc.
Some disciples will think that they know all of the
important dharma I expounded today on cultivation. They
will therefore not carefully ponder and fully incorporate
into their thinking the cultivation of which I spoke.
Rather, the wish they harbor in their hearts is to learn a
great dharma whereby they will become a Buddha in this
very lifetime.
Anyone with such a mentality has only superficial
knowledge, has fallen into confusion, and has lost his way.
Such a person will not learn the true Buddha-dharma.
Even if he is practicing great dharma, such as the Great
Perfection (Dzogchen) of the Nyingma sect, the Mind
537


Within Mind of the Kagyu sect, the Great Perfection of
Wonderful Wisdom of the Sakya sect, the Kalachakra
Vajra of the Geluk sect, Zen meditation of the Zen sect of
exoteric Buddhism, reciting a Buddha’s name of the Pure
Land sect, the dharma of the Consciousness-Only sect, or
samatha and vipasyana of the hinayana school, he will not
obtain any fruits from his practice and will not be able to
transform his consciousness into wisdom. Thus, he will
continue to go round and round in the state of an ordinary
person. He will not be able to manifest any realization, the
source of which is the wisdom of exoteric and esoteric
Buddhism. He will not be able to exhibit any actual
accomplishments in the Five Vidyas. He will only be able
to manifest that which an ordinary person manifests. He
may even be quite stupid such that he is only able to
memorize theories in books and speak of empty theories,
totally incapable of putting those theories into actual
practice. Such a person cannot actually do anything. Even
if he can do a few things, he cannot exceed those people in
the world who are experts in those few things.
Think about it. Does such a person embody the
Buddha-dharma? Is the wisdom derived from the Buddhadharma so inferior? How can one who has not yet
developed holy wisdom and still has the consciousness of
an ordinary person possess the true dharma to enlighten
himself and others? However, if you enter the practice of
the dharma according to these rules of cultivation, then
you can receive the true Buddha-dharma, can become truly
proficient in exoteric and esoteric Buddhism, and can
manifest accomplishments in the Five Vidyas. We should
therefore understand that cultivation is the foundation for
learning dharma, the cause of liberation, and the source of
realizing the state of holiness.
Today I spoke briefly on the subject of what
cultivation is. I expounded the subject of the correct
practice of bodhicitta, which is part of cultivation. I did


not speak of other dharma. There is so much more to
teach. However, if I casually discussed those other
teachings in this book, it would not be in accord with the
rules of discipline and could easily create the negative
karma of disrespect. Thus, I hope that all of you who learn
Buddhism will deeply immerse yourselves in the Tripitaka
and esoteric scriptures or will listen to my recorded
discourses on the dharma. If you attentively listen to those
discourses on the dharma with all your heart, within ten
days you can attain a certain degree of joy or the
wonderful joy of great enlightenment. If the causes and
conditions mature, you will experience beneficial effects
for your entire life or even attain great accomplishment,
liberation, and Buddhahood.
Now that you have learned this dharma of cultivation,
do you want to practice it? Anyone who engages in true
cultivation can become accomplished in the dharma and
attain liberation from the cycle of birth and death. Thus,
we must clearly understand something. Although you have
read “What is Cultivation” and although you have read the
eight fundamentals of cultivation and two sets of seven
branches based upon right view, that is called “reading
words relating to practice.” That is not cultivation. If you
understand the principles relating to cultivation, that is
called “understanding the theories of practice.” This is also
not cultivation. If you begin to implement this dharma of
cultivation according to its content, that is also not
cultivation. That is called “entering the process of
cultivation.” If you have done your utmost to apply great
compassion in accordance with this dharma of cultivation,
that is called “coarse cultivation.” It is not true and correct
cultivation. If you do not need to do your utmost to apply
great compassion, if you naturally, effortlessly and perfectly
carry out the eight fundamentals of cultivation and two sets
of seven branches according to the dharma, that is called
“cultivation.”


Why is it that doing your utmost in cultivation is not
called “cultivation” but rather is called “coarse cultivation”?
It is because since beginning-less time, the power of karma
and the hindrances of ignorance have obstructed
practitioners. Hence, they cannot let go of greed (selfish
desire), hatred (anger or antipathy), and ignorance
(delusion). They cannot let go of their attachment to self.
This produces the hindrances that are based on the
defilements (afflictions). This also produces the hindrances
that emanate from their own knowledge or habituated way
of knowing. These karmic hindrances devour all of the
right mindfulness (right thought) of these practitioners. As
a result, the process of implementing each of these rules of
cultivation is difficult for these practitioners. Precisely
because of this difficulty, they choose the method of using
their utmost effort to practice cultivation. Using one’s
utmost efforts in this manner is like a pebble that is coarse
on the inside and out rather than a shining precious stone
that has been carved and polished. Practicing part of the
eight fundamentals of cultivation and the two sets of seven
branches and not practicing the remaining parts is also not
called true cultivation. That is why it is called “coarse
cultivation” or “incomplete cultivation.”
Thoroughly understanding the rules of cultivation, not
forcefully implementing them, and naturally carrying out
the eight fundamentals of cultivation and two sets of seven
branches according to the dharma is true cultivation that is
without attachment to self and that has overcome the
hindrances. This is the path of bodhi. Thus, every day
practitioners should introspect upon Great Compassion for
All Living Beings as My Mother Bodhicitta and
Bodhisattva Correspondence Bodhicitta. They should
reflect upon those two sets of seven branches, asking
themselves whether they have practiced them according to
the dharma. If you were unable to practice these rules
according to the dharma contained in this discourse, it

shows that you have entered the state of “coarse
cultivation.” If you did not fully implement these rules,
then your cultivation is incomplete cultivation. You will not
become accomplished in the dharma and liberated from the
cycle of reincarnation through such incomplete cultivation.
Even if you have some minor accomplishments, it will be
impossible for you to attain great fortune and wisdom,
supernatural powers, and realization in the Five Vidyas.
If you introspect every day upon these two sets of
seven branches, are not forceful in implementing them, are
greatly compassionate, follow goodness in a natural way,
and carry out the two sets of seven branches naturally and
according to the dharma, that would be true cultivation
and complete practice. You will thereby easily be able to
attain liberation, become a holy being, and obtain good
fortune and wisdom. You will accordingly have realization
in the Five Vidyas. You will certainly reach the stage of a
Bodhisattva. Thus, you should understand that “reading
words relating to practice,” “understanding the theories of
practice,” “entering the process of cultivation,” and
“incomplete cultivation” is easy. To practice the two sets of
seven branches perfectly and without attachment is
difficult. Actually, when you let go of attachment to self,
you immediately enter correct and true cultivation. How
could this be difficult? Everyone can do that!
When you do your daily introspection, besides using
thoughts to contemplate and visualize, it is more
important that you must use as objects of introspection
fellow disciples with whom you are familiar, people with
whom you get along, people who are not good to you,
negative karmic conditions, any conditions or people that
make you unhappy, or people you find hard to get along
with, to whom who do not speak, or who do not speak to
you. You must use them as objects of your practice, asking
yourself, “Today did I act in accordance with the two sets


of seven branches and on my own initiative show goodwill
to these people? When I approached that person on my
own initiative and he attacked me with abusive words, did
I forbear those insults with patience and continue to
approach him in order to show goodwill?” You must not
bear any grudge due to abusive words, abusive conduct,
and insults. If, every day, you practice your bodhicitta
without relenting, carry out the two sets of seven branches
through your three karmas of physical action, speech, and
thoughts, actually cultivate yourself according to the
dharma in a real and concrete way, and realize “the thing
itself is empty,” then it will be very easy for you to learn
the supreme Buddha-dharma. In such case, bodhicitta and
the stage of a Bodhisattva will naturally be yours. That is
cultivation.
I have finished expounding the dharma of
cultivation that benefits living beings. However, there
is a certain type of matter harmful to living beings
that occurs all the time. I am referring to the matter of
using my name to harm the interests of living beings. I
would now like to call attention again to a problem
that is especially important and that everyone should
take seriously.
In this world, there currently are some dharma
kings, venerable ones, rinpoches, dharma teachers,
and even laypersons who claim that they are my
trusted followers. They may claim to represent me in
handling a certain matter. They may claim to convey a
certain message from me. Or, they may claim that
what they say are my own words. Actually, I have
disciples in exoteric and esoteric Buddhism and in
each of the main sects. No matter what the status of
any greatly virtuous person making such a claim may
be, nobody can represent me. This applies to even
very small matters!


Only when a person has a special-purpose
document that I gave him or her clearly indicating he
or she represents me in handling a certain matter, that
document contains my signature and fingerprint, and
that document is accompanied by a corresponding
sound recording or videotape can he or she represent
me in handling the matter specified in that document.
Otherwise, no matter how high the status of a dharma
king, venerable one, rinpoche, or dharma teacher may
be, his or her views, discourses, and explanations of
dharma do not represent my views and do not serve
as the standard of correct understanding and correct
views. I know that my own oral discourses and
writings are the true dharma without any bias. That is
because my oral discourses and writings truly benefit
and liberate living beings. Furthermore, nobody may
use any method to make additions, deletions, or
revisions to my writings or discourses on the dharma
given orally. Anyone who violates what is stated above
is certainly one with wrong views or one who has
fallen into demonic ways, no matter how high the
status of that person is.
Thus, the only time someone can represent me is
when everyone personally sees a document containing
my fingerprint and there is accompanying proof in the
form of an integral sound recording or videotape that
corresponds to the document and in which I
personally speak. Otherwise, no matter who the
Buddhist disciple may be, including those disciples of
holy virtue who have been at my side for a long period
of time, everything that they think, do, say, or write is
their own conduct and absolutely does not represent
me!
(The above discourse was translated from Chinese to English.)